The thesis of this book is that leftism is modernist Christianity. Although leftism has rejected the dogmas and external trappings of Christianity, at a deeper level it is still Christianity, and indeed represents the quintessance of Christianity in a way that even official Christianity has struggled to achieve. This claim is shocking for two reasons. Firstly, it is a contradiction of leftist self-understanding. Leftism has embraced anti-Christian and anti-religious views since its inception. Even Christian leftists would recognise the friction between their beliefs and the mainstream of leftism. Secondly, it is a contradition of rightist self-understanding. Many on the right see themselves as defenders of Christianity (or the vaguely defined "Judeo-Christian values") against the predations of godless, relativist leftism. Both of these claims are of course true in some sense. Most church-attending Christians in the Western world are politically right-of-centre, while atheism is associated mostly with left-of-centre and far-left politics. But this is at the level of surface dogma. I will argue that, at the deeper socio-cultural level, the reverse is true. Not only that, but I will argue that this apparent contradiction between the surface and deep levels of culture is entirely predictable from the nature of Christianity itself; for the modern left-right divide is nothing more than a modernist echo of a battle that has been going on within Christianity since its very beginning, and in fact goes back even beyond Christianity, to the very foundations of Israelite monotheism. This is the battle between the opposing forces of primary religion and counterreligion.
